Here we will prove some basic facts of the *finite field* `Z mod p`.

**No two non-zero elements multiply to zero**

That is:

    a != 0, b != 0 => ab != 0 (mod p)

Else that would mean that `ab` multiply to a product of `p`, but that is
not possible because any product of `p` has `p` as a divisor, and
neither `a` nor `b` has `p` as a divisor.

**You may "cancel" non-zero elements**

That is:

    ab = ac => b = c (OR a = 0)

That's because:

    a (b - c) = 0

And we know that this is not possible (assuming `a \ne 0`) unless `b - c
= 0`. In which case `b = c`.

(Note that both left and right cancelation are allowed.)

**Every non-zero element is invertible**

Consider the series:

    1a, 2a, 3a, ...

I say that this is a permutation of:

    1, 2, 3, ..., p - 1

That's because no two `b_0 a = b_1 a` for distinct `b_0, b_1`. Because
cancelation.

But then, by pigeonhole principle, there is some `b` such that `b a = 1
(mod p)`. In which case `b` is an inverse for `a`.

**The multiplicative subgroup**

Since every non-zero element is invertible, then the set of all non-zero
elements forms a *subgroup* of the finite field `Z mod p`. This is
called the *multiplicative subgroup*. It contains all other subgroups of
`Z mod p`. It has exactly `p - 1` elements:

    1, 2, ..., p - 1

**The subgroup generated by `a`**

The subgroup generated by `a \ne 0` consists of powers of `a`:

    a^1, a^2, a^3, ...

Why do I say this is a *subgroup*? We should prove that! Well, to start,
it is clearly closed under multiplication (by its very definition).

Now we will work toward showing that if `x` is in the series, then
`x^{-1}` is also in the series.

**The series of `a^i` loops back to unity**

Because `Z mod p` is finite, it must eventually be the case that:

    a^{k_0} = a^{k_1}

By cancelation (proven above), we have:

    a^{k_0 - k_1} = 1

Since this is true for some `k_0 - k_1`, we could choose a smallest
`|a|` such that: `a^{|a|} = 1`. We call `|a|` the *order* of `a`.

**The series of `a^i` contains all necessary inverses**

Consider any element `a^i` (for `0 <= i < |a|`). Then its inverse is
simply:

    a^{|a| - i} = (a^{i})^{-1}

Note that for convenience we will commonly write:

    a^{-i} = (a^{-1})^i

**The series of `a^i` is thus a subgroup**

This follows from being closed and containing all inverses. That's the
definition of a subgroup.

**The order of `a` order divides `p-1`**

We already said that the multiplicative subgroup of size `p - 1`
contains any other subgroup in the finite field.

Thus, by Lagrange's theorem, the order of the subgroup generated by `a`
must divide `p - 1`.

Very important note, the subgroup generated by `a` may be *strictly
contained* contained within the multiplicative subgroup.

Consider `Z mod 5`, and the subgroup generated by `a = 4`. Note that `4`
is its own inverse, as:

    4 * 4 = 16 = 1 (mod 5)

Note that even in this case, the order of four is two, which divides `p
- 1 = 5 - 1 = 4`.
