Java adds features very slow. The last big set of features was
in 2004. Java 6 (2006) added no language changes; Java 7 (2011) added
generic type inferene; and Java 8 (2015) is the most significant
release in 11 years, adding just lambdas and default methods.

This is striking relative to C++. But I guess Java benefited from
C++'s learnings from the beginning.

* Java 1 (1996)
    * Prehistory.
* Java 2 (1998)
    * In 1999 gained HotSpot.
* Java 3 (2000)
    * First release that started with HotSpot.
* Java 4 (2002)
    * Exception chaining.
* Java 5 (2004)
    * Generics
    * Annotations
    * Autoboxing
    * enums
    * `for (Item item : items)` added
* Java 6 (2006)
    * This was the Java I lived with at QC.
    * Looks like several improvements to HotSpot happened in this
      version.
    * Added incremental GC. Tiered compilation.
* Java 7 (2011)
    * `invokedynamic`
        * For dynamic languages; I don't want to get into it.
    * Can write `List<>` to do some type inference.
        * `Map<X, Y> myMap = new Map<>();`
* Java 8 (2015)
    * Lambdas
        * `() -> { doStuff }`.
        * `(int x) -> x + 1`
        * Can sometimes leave out types if they can be inferred:
          `BinaryIntOp f = (x, y) -> x + y`
        * Just a shorthand way of defining a class implementing an
          `operation` method.
        * It looks like you can use a lambda anywhere an interface
          with a single abstract method is required. That adds
          flexibility.
        * Can close over variables, but they need to be never
          modified. They're going to be copied. But of course, they
          can experience mutations.
    * Default Methods
        * Interfaces can provide a default implementation of a
          method. But still no data.
        * Problem would be if two interfaces had different
          implementations of same method signature. That would cause
          an error.
        * I guess this makes them more like mixins.
* And many more. Up to Java 14 today?

## Java Ecosystem

The OpenJDK project develops the primary Java
implementation. Officially supported releases are called Java
SE. These are based on OpenJDK and released by Oracle (used to be by
Sun).

Apparently Oracle no longer releases security updates for older
versions of Java under a permissive license. Thus there exists
AdoptOpenJDK which is a project that maintains older versions of Java.

# Interpreted Languages on the JVM

- All these languages get compiled directly to JVM bytecode, not Java
  source code.
  - But the compiled code can still be very dynamic in the sense that
    *method dispatch* is dynamic.
  - You can annotate `.class` file with sourcefile/line number. Stack
    traces can then report line number in the hosted language source
    code.
  - Do note: the JVM will report class names and method names in stack
    traces. But those are the names generated by the hosted language to
    JVM compiler.
  - So if you `(defn area [shape] ...)` in Clojure, that may show up as:
    `my_app.core$area.invoke(core.clj:10)`. Because your function got
    compiled to a class named `area` with a method called `invoke`.
- Clojure (2007): a lisp with built-in immutable datastructures.
- Groovy (2003): historically very significant, maybe the first hosted
  language? Used especially for scripts and configuration. Java
  specific.
  - Built into Gradle and Jenkins, and thus possibly the most frequently
    encountered.
- JRuby (2001): biggest use case is running Rails apps on the JVM.
  Avoids GIL, lets you use Java threads, java libraries... Up to Ruby
  4.0 (experimental) as of 2026. Ruby 3.4 is fully supported.
- GraalVM: has runtimes for JavaScript, Ruby, Python, R...
    - Graalpy (first "production" release from 2019) is pretty
      up-to-date (supports Python 3.12) as of 2026.
    - TruffleRuby (released 2013; at 3.4) appears on-par with JRuby in
      2026.
- Jython (1997) and Rhino (released 1997; a JS engine on JVM) are dead,
  probably killed by Graal...
  - Jython never jumped to Python 3. Possibly limited by the rise of a
    CPython C-extension ecosystem of numpy, scipy, pandas, ML
    libraries...
  - I think also Rhino was overtaken by rapid JavaScript development,
    and shift of emphasis toward V8/Node.
- BTW, JRuby, TruffleRuby, Graalpy: they all have trouble with C
  extensions.
  - JRuby basically doesn't support C extensions. TruffleRuby tries to
    support them.
  - For Graalpy, they also try to support C extensions. But this can be
    hard when C extension libraries make assumptions that are CPython
    specific.
- Scala (2003) and Kotlin (2011/2012) are the other two JVM languages.
  They are static.
