We're considering the finite field Z mod p.

## Cancelation, Permutations, Inverses

First, we have:

    a != 0, b != 0 => ab != 0

Because the modulus `p` cannot factor into `ab` of course.

This implies also cancelation:

    ab = ac => b = c OR a = 0

That's because otherwise:

    a (b - c) = 0

Thus we also know:

    1a, 2a, 3a, ...

is a permutation of

    1, 2, 3, ...

Indeed, the fact that multiplication by `a` gives a permutation of `1,
... ,p-1` implies that `a` has an inverse.

## Every element is a root

Consider powers of a:

    a**1, a**2, a**3, ...

We know that this never becomes zero. So it must enter a
cycle. Question: does this ever return to `a`? Equivalent; does this
ever become 1? Equivalent: is `a` a root of 1 in this field? (Also
equivalent: is the inverse of a also `a` positive power of `a`?).

Imagine that we have the scenario:

    a, a**2, ..., b=a**k, ba, ba**2, ... b a**j = b

Then by cancellation we know that `a**j=1`.

## Orders within a cycle of powers

We say that `a` has order `k` if:

    a**k = 1 and a**j != 1 for any j < k

Note: if `a**m = 1`, this implies that `m` is a multiple of `k`.

Let us say that `b = a**i`. Then what is the order of `b`?

If `i` divides `k`, then it should be clear that the order of `b` is
`k/i`.

Let us say that `b` has order `j`. Then `b**j = 1` implies that `a**ij
= 1`. We *must* have that `ij` is a multiple of `k`. In fact, the
easiest way for this to be true is if `j = k / gcd(k, i)`.

Basically, `gcd(k, i)` includes all prime factors common to `k` and `i`.
So `k / gcd(k, i)` includes all prime factors of `k` not already found
in `i`. So we must have that `i * (k / gcd(k, i))` is the smallest
number such that (1) this is divisible by `i` and (2) this is divisible
by `k`.

Thus we see that the order of any element `a**i` must be a divisor of
the order of `a`.

## Orders of inverses

The order of `a` must be equal to the order of `a**-1`. Think. If
`a**-1` has order `k`, then we know:

     a**k a**-k = 1
     a**k 1 = 1
     a**k = 1

And we already know that the smallest such `k` is the order of `a`.

From before, we know this must imply:

    gcd(k, k-1) = 1

Is that true? Well, note:

    gcd(k, k - i) = gcd(i, k)

This is for the same reason why Euclid's algorithm works. Which
naturally implies:

    gcd(k, k - 1) = gcd(1, k) = 1

So this is a good intuition check!

A few interesting notes:

1. An inverse of `a` is always generated by repeated multiplication by
   a. (I said this previously.)
2. Repeated multiplication by `a**-1` yields the reverse of the
   permutation generated by repeated multiplication by `a`.

## Coprime orders multiply

If `a` has order `k`, and `b` has order `j`, then

    if k, j are coprime, then ab has order kj

It should be clear that:

    (ab)**(kj)=1

But why can't `(ab)**m = 1` for some `m < kj`? In that case, consider:

Since `m` is not a multiple of both `k` and `j`, then at least one of
`a**m` or `b**m` must not be one. Let us assume `a**m != 1`.

Then additionally, we must have `b**m != 1`, as `(a**m) * 1 != 1`.

So our question is: can it ever be that `a**m` is the inverse of
`b**m`?

The answer is no. Note firs that because they are inverses, we must
have that `a**m` has the same order as `b**m`. But we know that `a**m`
must have order dividing `k`, while `b**m` must have order dividing
`j`.

But since `k, j` is coprime, no number divides both `k` and `j` except
`1`. So `a**m` and `b**m` only have the same order if both are of
order `1`, which means `a**m = 1 == b**m` which only happens when `m =
kj`.

Another way to put it:

    Every inverse of a**i is in the chain generated by a.

    Consider a chain of b**i. Assume it does not intersect the chain
    of a**i.

    Then no inverse of a**i is in the chain of b**i.

    Therefore, (ab)**i = 1 only when a**i = 1 = b**i.

    If a and b have coprime orders, then their chains must be
    non-intersecting.

## Chain of ab of coprime order contains chains of a and b

We know that if `a` and `b` have coprime order, then `ab` has order `k_a
k_b`. But what elements does `ab` contain? I claim it contains all:

    a**i b**j

To show this, I must show that the chain contains `a` and `b`. It's
easy to see that:

    (ab) ** k_a = b**k_a

Now, we know that `b**k_a` generates a subchain of `b`. I claim that it
generates exactly the chain of `b`. This is because `k_a` is coprime to
`k_b`. We already showed before that the length of the subchain of
`b**k_a` is:

     k_b / gcd(k_a, k_b)

And coprime means `gcd(k_a, k_b) = 1`. Which means the length of the
subchain generated by `b**k_a` is still `k_b`. So the chains contain the
same elements. In particular, `b` is contained in both.

The same argument works for `a`. So `a` and `b` are both in the chain
generated by `ab`.

## `k`th roots of unity imply number of `k`th roots of any `a`

A number `a` may have *no* `k`th roots. But let us say that it has
some. I want to show that the number of `k`th roots of `a` must equal
the number of `k`th roots of unity.

It is clear that if `x` is a `k`th root of `a`, then for any `kth` root
of unity `u`, `xu` is also a kth root, as:

    (xu)**k = x**k u**k = a 1 = a

This means that there are at least as many `k`th roots of `a` as there
are `k`th roots of unity.

Likewise, I will show that every `k`th root `x` implies the existence
of some `k`th root of unity `u`. Consider roots `x_1, ... x_n`. Then
note:

    (x_1)**k = (x_i)**k

Now we know that `x_i = b x_1` for some `b`. So consider this:

    (x_1)**k = (b x_1)**k
    (x_1)**k = b**k (x_1)**k
    1 = b**k

So `b` is a root of unity.

This shows that if `n` roots of `a` exist, then `n-1` roots of unity
also exist. But of course, we didn't consider `1` as its own root. We
didn't already count this as `b != 1` (else `x_1 = x_i`, which
violates assumption they are all distinct).

The first part shows that the number of `k`th roots of `a` is at least
the number of roots of unity, while the second part shows that the
number of roots of unity is at least as many as the number of roots of
`a`.

## Proof of Primitive Root Theorem

We showed that every element of a finite group is in a cyclic group.

We know that we can "factor" any cyclic subgroup further into cyclic
subgroups with order `p**k` for some prime `p`. We know that the
product of these cyclic subgroups is the original group.

So consider all subgroups with order `p**k`. Let us ignore subgroups
of order `p**j` if they are contained in a subgroup of order
`p**k`. Every element is in the product of all these subgroups.

Let us assume, momentarily, that there is at most one subgroup of
order `p**k` (for any `k`, not necessarily maximal).

First, note that this means that if there exists a subgroup `p**k`,
then any subgroup of order `p**(k-i)` must be contained by it. Else,
we could have two distinct subgroups of order `p**(k-i)`.

So that means we have a bunch of subgroups of order `p_i**k`. All
these subgroups have distinct `p_i`. So they are all coprime. So their
product has a `\prod p_i**k` elements. This is the entire
multiplicative group.  Which shows the entire multiplicative group is
cyclic (since product of cyclic groups of coprime order is also
cyclic).

It then immediately follows that order of every subgroup divides
`p-1`.

## A `k`th degree polynomial has at most `k` roots

Consider polynomial division. Say I want to divide `p(x)` by `q(x)`.
Then:

    f(x) = q(x) g(x) + r(x)

Where `g(x)` has degree at most `|f| - |q|` and `r(x)` has degree at
most `|q| - 1`. You see right?

Now, consider if `a` is a root of `f`. Then:

    f(x) = (x - a) g(x) + r(x)

But then we must have `r(x)` is a constant. And `r(a) = 0`. So `r(x) =
0`.

We can only repeat this at most `k` times for a `k` degree polynomial.

So that means there can be only one chain of degree `p`. Every element
of a chain with degree `p` is a `p`th root. These `p` elements of the
chain are the `p` roots of degree `p`, and there can be no more roots,
so no more chains.
