# Flat (Boxer) Six

## Timing

```
# I believe this is three boxer twins, each successive one being 120deg
# offset from the prior one. You can see this also as a composition of
# two opposed 120deg inline threes.
#
# Let's label the cylinders R1-R3 and L1-L3.

-   0deg-180deg: R1 combustion
- 120deg-300deg: L3 combustion
- 240deg-420deg: R2 combustion
- 360deg-540deg: L1 combustion
- 480deg-660deg: R3 combustion
- 600deg-780deg: L2 combustion (through 60deg)

# I believe this is the firing order of Porsche flat sixes, for
# instance.
#
# This gives an even firing interval of 120deg, just like the inline
# six.
```

## Balance

- Primary translational balance: each individual boxer pair has primary
  translational balance, so we expect the composition to have it.
  - Likewise, the individual triple banks have primary translational
    balance, so the two banks should have it.
- Primary rotational imbalance.
  - Just barely though.
  - If we consider L1 and R3, we do expect this pair to have a net
    torque. That's because unlike a flat four, the two cylinders are not
    180deg out-of-phase; they are 240deg out-of-phase (and oppositely
    oriented).
  - However, consider R1 and L3. By (almost) symmetry they (almost)
    generate the exact same torque, but with the opposite orientation.
  - And, of course, the central pair doesn't generate a torque because
    it straddles the CoM and the primary forces are 180deg out-of-phase
    (thus cancelling).
  - Actually, I think this is wrong. I think that L1 and R3 are
    ever-so-slightly farther from the CoM than R1 and L3. Because the
    distance is greater for L1/R3, its torque is greater.
  - This is not a great difference in torque, since the difference is
    about one crank pin.
  - It's interesting: I think this is _worse_ than the H4, which really
    did have primary rotational balance.
  - We basically have two opposite orientation triples, but because they
    aren't directly across from each other, we do have a small residual
    torque.
- Secondary translational balance: each boxer pair has secondary
  translational balance. Each triple bank has secondary translational
  balance. This has secondary translational balance.
- Secondary rotational imbalance. Just barely imbalanced though.
  - The same argument for primary rotational imbalance applies. The
    torques of L1 and R3 do not cancel each other, and there is no
    symmetry with R1 and L3 (which are both closer to the CoM).
  - Thus, there is a residual secondary torque.
  - Additionally, the central boxer pair generates a torque because the
    secondary forces are in-phase.
  - That said, L1 and R3's secondary waveforms are not in-phase, so they
    do not add. They are 120deg out-of-phase, and thus when summed the
    amplitude stays the same. That is an advantage over the H4, where
    L1/R2 and R1/L2 are in-phase.
  - Also, in the H6, the difference in distance between L1/R3 and R1/L3
    is less (proportionally) than the H4 difference between L1/R2 and
    R1/L2. Thus, there is more cancellation.
  - Well, if the cylinder size is the same, then I think you end up with
    the same torque, but a bigger engine. If you kept displacement the
    same and used smaller cylinders, then rods/crank pins become
    shorter, and net torque goes down.
  - I should mention: you also need to include the torque generated by
    the central pair, which are not opposed.

## Discussion

- This is most associated with Porsche.
  - Subaru also used to make one, I think.
- On motorcycles, most identified with the current Honda Gold Wing.
- I don't believe any 180deg V6 engines are made. So boxer sixes are the
  only flat sixes.
- Compared to inline six, these are much shorter. They can get weight
  lower on the car.
- D4A gives a number of reasons why the flat/boxer six engine might have
  a lighter crankshaft.
- Main downside versus inline six are that it is wide, so hard to fit in
  an engine bay, and it has two cylinder heads/camshafts/manifolds.
- Compared to an H4, the H6 doesn't gain perfect secondary rotational
  balance. It even might lose some primary rotational balance.
  - I do believe it has substantially better secondary rotational
    balance than the H4, though.
  - And the lost primary rotational balance is also minimal.
  - On the other hand, it has 60deg of overlap.
  - And of course it can make more power, probably by hitting higher RPM
    because each cylinder is smaller and each piston is lighter.
- I think relative to an I6, the H6 is a lot easier to fit in a car.
  From this analysis it feels like the balance is worse.
  - And it gives a lower CoM, which improves handling.
  - Which is why I think Porsche uses them in sporty vehicles.
- Source: https://youtu.be/mTS48jX68YU?t=733
