You have two "half" cells. One contains a pure zinc metal rod (called
*electrode*) immersed in a zinc sulfate solution. Solid zinc sulfate
wants to dissolve in water. So you have Zn^+2 "cations" (positively
charged ions) and SO_4^-2 anions in this solution.

The other half contains a pure copper metal rod (again, called an
electrode) immersed in a copper sulfate solution. Solid copper sulfate
wants to dissolve in water. So you have Cu^+2 cations and SO_4^-2 anions
in this solution.

The pure Zn electrode in the zinc sulfate will not dissolve. There's no
electrical reason for it to do that. Likewise the pure Cu electrode in
the copper sulfate won't dissolve.

I guess there's an important note here. It sounds like a zinc sulfate
solution (with a pure copper electrode) is energetically preferred to a
copper sulfate solution (with a pure zinc electrode). That is:

  Cu^+2 + Zn -> Zn^+2 + Cu

TODO: why?

Let's imagine. Let's assume we could "remove" a Zn^+2 cation from the
zinc solution. Now there is an SO_4^-2 anion without a friend. This
half-cell has net negative charge. It would like it if you would please
remove two electrons. If you take away two electrons from the Zn
electrode, a Zn^+2 cation will dissolve into the solution. (That is:
there's no net cation loss).

Same thing on the other side. Let's say we *added* a Zn^+2 cation onto
the copper side. Now we have a net positive charge here. If you add two
electrons at the copper electrode, one of the Cu^+2 cations will accept
those electrons and "plate out." Now we have an electrically neutral
side.

So that's what happens. The zinc electrode dissolves, creating new Zn^+2
cations, sometimes an anion will come over from the copper cell, and
sometimes a Zn^2+ cation will travel away to the copper cell. (The
pressures presumably want to stay balanced.)

In the meantime, the electrons can be used to oxidize the Cu^+2. This
loss of Cu^2+ is balanced by the SO_4^-2 migrating to the zinc sulfate
side, or the Cu^+2 migrating to the copper sulfate side.

The copper electrode is called the *cathode* (copper cations are plated
here), while the zinc electrode is called the *anode* (zinc cations are
produced here).
