## Positive Displacement Pumps

Works by "trapping" some water and then moving it upward.

Examples:

**Piston Pump (Reciprocating Pump)**

This is your common farm pump.

There is a chamber. At the bottom of the chamber is the pipe with the
incoming source of water. The water can be "trapped" though, because
there is a valve which closes. The water will only be drawn into the
chamber if there is negative pressure that pulls the valve open and
draws the water up.

At the top there is a second valve. This is where the water will be
pushed out. You need this valve to seal the chamber to put it at
negative pressure.

There is a piston. When you pull the piston up, the chamber is put at
negative pressure. The bottom valve opens (the top valve is in its
standard closed state). Water is drawn into the chamber.

When the pressure equalizes, the bottom valve closes. Now you may push
the piston. The chamber is at positive pressure. The *top* valve now
opens and the water is expelled.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piston_pump

**Rope Pump/Chain Pump**

Here you a rope tied in a circle with knots tied in it. The rope is
threaded through a pipe which touches the bottom water source.

You pull the rope up to rotate the rope chain. As the knots pass through
the pipe, water is trapped. It is elevatored up through the pipe.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rope_pump

## Rotodynamic Pumps

**Axial Flow Pump**

This kind of pump uses a *propeller* in a sheath. It works in the
obvious way; the rotation of the propeller imparts velocity to the
medium fluid.

Question: how to drive the propeller? Typically the propeller is located
at a 90deg bend, and the drive shaft goes out straight. It has to be
fitted with some water-tight casing.

We call this an "axial flow pump" because the flow is parallel to the
axis of the driveshaft.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axial-flow_pump

**Radial Flow Pump (AKA Centrifugal Pump)**

A *propeller* consists of twisted blades. It creates thrust parallel to
the driveshaft. It pulls from one side and pushes out the other.

An *impeller* consists of non-twisted blades. It wants to fling the
medium *radially**. Note that this is not *centrifugal force* (which is
fictional anyway). It is harnessing *inertia*.

A *paddle wheel* is a form of impeller. Just like how a steamboat uses a
partially submerged paddle wheel, presumably you could use this to pump
water. Propulsion is really just pumping after all.

A fully submerged paddle wheel wouldn't work for propulsion. That would
push an equal amount of water backward and forward, and there would be
no net momentum to harness for propulsion.

For pumping, we will feed the impeller at a 90deg angle to the direction
of pumping. The impeller will spin the water in the chamber. This will
push the water toward the outer edge of the chamber.

However, create an opening tangent to the chamber wall. The water will
want to relieve the pressure at the outside by flowing out of the
opening.

The chamber should ideally not be an exact circle. It should spiral
outward. That is, the chamber wall is *not* tangent to the radial force
being exerted by the impeller. This allows force to be harnessed for
spinning the water around. This kind of chamber is called a *volute*.

https://www.britannica.com/technology/volute-centrifugal-pump

The same concept can be used for a *centrifugal fan*.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Centrifugal_fan

There is a question of the orientation of the impeller blades.
*Backward* trailing blades appear common. I believe this tends to more
efficiently direct the force on the medium *radially*. Forward curving
blades will tend to direct the force *tangentially*. It is true that the
final direction of the force should be tangential, but this is handled
by the volute.

I assume the problem with forward curved blades is that they will want
to spin the water round in a circle, rather than *out*.

## Compressors

Compressors and pumps are very similar. Gasses are compressible, while
liquids are not particularly compressible.

A common kind of compressor is like that found in an internal combustion
engine. The pistons are doing compression. This is a *reciprocating
compressor*, which is just like the piston pump.

There are both centrifugal and axial compressors.

Axial compressors (just like axial pumps) may have *stators*. The blades
of the propeller will not just tend to move the medium axially. They
will also try to spin it. This swirl is wasted kinetic energy from the
standpoint of propulsion/compression. Thus stationary blades that are
curved in the *opposite* direction can be used to redirect the swirl
velocity axially. This should increase efficiency.

**Purpose: Supercharging/Turbocharging**

An engine burns fuel, and is thus limited by how much oxygen is
available. The greater the density of oxygen, the more fuel can be
burned.

Sports cars sometimes have slots for *ram-air intake*. This means that
the velocity of the vehicle will ram air into the engine.

A *supercharger* is a compressor that is *mechanically* driven by the
engine. It normally involves a belt attached to the crankshaft.

A *turbocharger* is also a compressor. The difference is that it is
driven by the *exhaust gas*. It does this via a *turbine*. Turbochargers
and superchargers are used for the same purpose. It is only the
mechanism that is different.

## Water Wheels

**Stream Wheels**

A traditional *stream* water wheel is partially submerged. The wheel
tries to use the kinetic energy of the flowing water. You can use it
even when there is little drop in height; the wheel is only trying to
gather the kinetic energy. However, because the only energy you harvest
is in the kinetic energy of the water, you need either a high flow
(mass) or a high velocity. Or both. The blades could be flat, but curved
blades will have better efficiency.

**Undershot Wheels**

The next style is called *undershot*. Here there is a small drop. You
try to harvest both the kinetic energy and the energy of the drop.
Sometimes the drop is formed by a small *weir* (basically a mini-dam)
that impounds water and raises its height.

The curved wheel buckets will tend to "catch" the water as it falls over
the weir. As the water falls, it will not gain speed - that will be
imparted to the wheel. Still, most of the energy imparted is from
kinetic energy of the water.

**Overshot Wheels**

Here you dump the water on top of the wheel, just a little fore of the
midpoint. There is little to no horizontal motion that you are trying to
harvest. You are trying to harvest the gravitational potential energy.

The height the water will drop must be greater than the height of the
wheel.

A *backshot* (AKA *pitchback*) wheel is an overshot wheel where the
water falls behind the center point. Its operation is the same,
basically. The rotation orientation is opposite.

An advantage of the backshot wheel is that it can still operate when the
"tailrace" (the drainage) is backed up. It is rotating in the correct
orientation. Presumably, especially when tailrace height may be
variable, this allows you to use more of the head, because you don't
have to worry as much about the tailrace flooding. That could damage the
wheel.

The overshot wheel can harvest some kinetic energy though as the water
falls. OTOH, the backshot wheel can sit a little in the water downstream
to harvest kinetic energy of the tailrace.

All in all, overshot and backshot wheels sound about the same in
principle.

https://books.google.com/books?id=FKtkU4E-mWYC&pg=PA168&lpg=PA168&dq=overshot+vs+%22backshot%22+wheel&source=bl&ots=xh9E6BMi4g&sig=ACfU3U1pX7HHghs6p5AeJfsP0JDMGidCug&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwi2o_7UmuHnAhVVtZ4KHQP2Dy04ChDoATABegQICxAB#v=onepage&q=overshot%20vs%20%22backshot%22%20wheel&f=false

**Wheel Dimensions**

The larger the diameter of the wheel, the greater the torque. Even if
the same energy were collected, increased torque (and lower speed) might
be desirable. On the other hand, it feels like you should be able to
gear

More energy should be collected, I think, the greater the diameter of
the wheel. With an overshot wheel, the greater the diameter means more
of the water's drop in height will be held in the curved buckets.

**Breastshot Wheels**

With a *breastshot wheel*, you hit the wheel at about center height.

Why would building the weir allow you to harvest more energy?

* Why not the drop increase speed?





The greater the "head" (the distance for the water to fall), the more
potential energy there is to harness. One way to do this is to hit the
wheel at about the midpoint, and have curved buckets that the water
pushes.

Finally, you can dump water directly onto the wheel. If you locate it a
little back of the wheel, this is called *backshot*. If you dump toward
the front it is called *overshot*. You curve the buckets of the wheel
such that the water is held in the buckets for as long as possible so
that the energy is harnessed for rotation.

A problem with backshot/overshot wheels is that they cannot harness a
large volume of water; they can harness a long drop though. They are
very efficient for the low amount of water throughput.


http://www.powerinthelandscape.co.uk/water/water_wheels.html

## Water Turbines

**Pelton Wheel**

The *Pelton Wheel* is a first improvement over the backshot/overshot
water wheel. Basically, you use nozzles to spray water at high velocity
horizontally. This smacks against the wheel, spinning it. You can have a
nozzle at the bottom, and a second nozzle at the top. In fact, you can
have many nozzles.

To take advantage of a large drop, you would normally need a huge water
wheel. But with a Pelton wheel you should be able to convert the large
drop into a large pressure, and then spray this hard against a much
smaller wheel.

The shape of the blades is such that, after striking, the water has very
little velocity.

**Kaplan Turbine**

Here, you basically have a hole in the ground with a propeller. As the
water falls through the hole, it spins the propeller.

You can see that the flow rate of water is what matters here, not the
drop. You can mount a Kaplan turbine horizontally in a pipe if desired.
You are converting kinetic energy of the liquid into rotational energy
for the driveshaft.

The water is going to have to lose kinetic energy: move more slowly
after than before. Won't that cause the volume of flow to be reduced?
And if so, won't that result in pooling of water? Won't you effectively
be damming the water source? The more energy you try to harness, won't
there be more of a damming effect?

It seems to me that if water is carrying kinetic energy, and you put a
propeller in that requires force to move through (so you can harness the
kinetic energy), then this should necessarily increase pressure on one
side. I suppose that doesn't have to decrease the flow rate.

**Francis Turbine**

A *Francis turbine* sends water through a spiraling volute. This gives
the water swirl. The water than is guided to smack an impeller. Thus the
tangential motion is transformed into inward radial motion.

The water still wants to fall, and the shape of the fins is designed for
this. As the water falls, the blades curve toward it. Thus the axial
falling action wants to also spin the wheel.

**Kaplan Turbine**

This uses a propeller essentially. Water falls through axially, spinning
the propeller. The innovation of Kaplan is that the fins of the
propeller can rotate to be at the optimal angle no matter the
(variable) flow rate.

**Comparison**

The best turbine depends on the *water flow rate* and the *hydraulic
head* (basically the vertical drop). Note that flow rate does *not* mean
the speed of the water. It means the *volume* of water per second.

Head can come either from gravity (distance of drop), or from
*pressure*. Dams create high-head situations.

The Pelton wheel is best for low flow rates but high drops. With high
drop you can push very high pressure through a nozzle. This involves a
lot of speed. Then the Pelton wheel can harness the speed by basically
stopping the speed dead in its tracks, converting all the energy.

Alternatively, consider a fast moving river with very little drop.

https://www.quora.com/What-is-difference-b-w-Kaplan-and-francis-turbine

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_turbine#/media/File:Water_Turbine_Chart.png

## Turbojets, Turbofans, Turboprops

A turbojet is just an axial compressor, a combustion chamber a turbine
to drive the compressor, and a nozzle. Exhaust provides thrust.

Note that compression adds the following advantages:

1. Expansion of gas must be driven *out* through turbine. Compression
   stops gas from expanding out the front.
2. Greater density of oxygen increases complete burning of the fuel.

I guess that the velocity of the air leaving the turbine may be quite
slow. Thus a convergent nozzle can be used to increase the pressure and
bring it up to speed.

*Thrust* is force, which is momentum change per second. Momentum change
is equal to mass of air tossed backwards times the velocity of that air.
To generate more thrust, you must either toss more air backward, or you
must toss it backward faster.

It is more efficient to toss a larger mass backward, more slowly. The
reason is because:

    p = mv
    KE = 1/2 mv^2

So if you 100x the mass and 1/100x the velocity, you will get the same
momentum change at a much lower kinetic energy. And remember: your
engine is burning fuel, which releases energy, which is imparted to the
gas which is how you're going to gain momentum.

The rate of energy release - the power - determines the rate of momentum
change - the thrust. But you want to keep as much energy as possible for
the plane itself - not the air being thrown backward.

Basically: if the exhaust is leaving the airplane at a high rate of
speed, your engine is running inefficiently.

One way to reduce the rate of speed of exiting gas is to make it do more
work. That is - extra more energy from the exhaust. This is what a
*turbofan* does. In addition to a jet "core," there is a big fan in
front. The exhaust turns the fan, which blows air through the "outer"
duct. This effectively increases the mass of air you are "throwing"
backward, increasing efficiency.

**Question Re: Nozzles**

It sounds like the nozzle of a turbojet is meant to *accelerate* the
exhaust. I thought it would be for *deceleration* rocket style. But it
sounds like after the turbine the velocity of the air may need
acceleration to get back up to the original velocity.

Fine. Look, we know that the engine is adding energy to the airflow. The
energy is stored somewhere. We've said it's not stored in the velocity.
It can be stored in the undirected kinetic energy. It can also be stored
as more molecules being crammed into a smaller volume.

The nozzle is going to accelerate the airflow. Where will the velocity
come from? It needs to come from temperature. So the gas should cool,
but its kinetic energy will increase.

Because the




This energy is stored as either temperature and/or pressure. The
convergent nozzle accelerates the

**Turbojet Efficiency**

Turbojets are very effective at burning all the fuel. Very little is
only partially burned. There is lots of oxygen left over. In this
respect, the engine is very efficient at turning the fuel into energy.

But how do you convert more of that energy into *thrust*? Could you not
have a really large nozzle (cross-section) that drops the pressure
greatly so that the velocity leaving the engine is low?

The pressure cannot drop to zero through the nozzle. The nozzle's
endpoint must be at atmospheric pressure. I suppose the question is how
much velocity (and temperature) is left over in the exhaust.

If you have a really big nozzle (large cross section), then that implies
a very high pressure at the beginning of the nozzle (for equal size
combustion chamber). To achieve that compression, you need the turbine
to extract lots of energy to do lots of compression. That's what you
want...

But, compressing the intake air will heat it a ton. That will lead to
greater waste heat, btw. More importantly, *even holding the fuel
consumption constant*, the temperature in the combustion chamber will be
hotter, simply because of the greater pressurization.

You could worry: uh-oh, won't the exhaust be very hot? That's bad! But
no: the large nozzle is simply undoing the work of the compressor.
Insofar as the compressor causes the air temperature to rise, the nozzle
should cause the air temperature to drop.

I believe the problem is specifically at the turbine. If the temperature
in the engine is too great, the turbine is going to melt.

https://www.quora.com/How-do-I-increase-jet-engines%E2%80%99-efficiency

**Afterburner**

The combustion chamber can only be so hot, because otherwise it will
destroy the turbine. But *after* the turbine you can throw gas into the
stream and ignite it. There is typically some oxygen left over in the
exhaust stream because you can't put too much gas into the jet
combustion chamber else overheating the turbine.

**Turboprop**

There are *propeller* planes, and *ducted fan planes*. The ducted fan
design is unusual outside turbofans. Apparently ducted fans can have
higher efficiency than propellers at high speed, because something about
the tips of the propeller blah blah blah.

It sounds like turbofan vs turboprop is same question as fan vs prop.
