Classic example. Prove you have a 3-coloring of a map. This is an NP
complete problem.

You color the map. You hash each color (with a nonce). This hides the
values. You send the hashed map to the validator.

You let the validator ask to reveal two adjacent vertices. You
give the hash pre-image, and they can verify this.

You can repeat as many times as you want; but you need to permute the
colors used each time. This gives no info about the coloring.

## Zero Knowledge Password Proof

I don't understand the point of ZKPP. How is it better than uploading
a public key to a remote server, and then the remote server challenges
us with nonces, asking us to sign them?

You can encrypt the private key with your weak password. Maybe the
weakly encrypted private key can be attacked offline with a dictionary
attack? You keep trying to decrypt until you find a decrypted private
key that matches the public key?

What if the server keeps the public key private? Then how can you tell
when the dictionary attack has succeeded?

I guess maybe you observed signed nonces in the past, and you can
check whether signing gives the same answer? But that means either (1)
they weren't using SSL, or (2) you broke SSL temporarily. Even if they
didn't use SSL, then they can still use DH for the nonce. In which
case you'd have to not only eavesdrop the SSL communication, but
literally do an impersonation.

Basically: what attack does ZKPP prevent that public/private key
authentication via signing nonces doesn't?

**Some more thoughts**

If the verifier program is known, then you can test candidate
decryptions of the prover offline. You stop when the verifier accepts
the output of the prover. So we must assume the verifier is *also*
secret.

The prover must involve the production of random, ephemeral
secrets. That means that you can't just feed the prover the same
inputs observed over the network, and check whether the prover
produces the same outputs. This prevents eavesdropping the channel and
trying a replay attack against the prover.

But isn't that the same as signing nonces agreed on via DH?

**More more thoughts**

https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~smb/papers/neke.pdf
