Motorcycles typically have hydraulically actuated disc brakes. Old bikes
used to use drum brakes at the rear, but that is no longer the case.

Medium sized bikes and larger will typically have two rotors at the
front, and one in the back.

Hydraulic brakes are superior to cable actuation because there is less
frictional loss, and better feel.

Driving 4 Answers claims that you are limited in braking power by
traction. That is correct. There is no reason for more braking power if
you would break traction. In fact, ABS should kick in!

Then why do bigger bikes have bigger rotor diameters? It is true that a
bigger rotor should have more leverage. A more massive bike should
probably have bigger rotors because it has more traction (due to
increased mass).

Would swapping stock rotors for bigger ones help? Probably not. The
stock brakes should have already been sized big enough to brake
traction/engage ABS. The larger rotors could act as better heat
sinks/dissipators. As we know, as the rotors get hot, braking
performance is going to drop. One reason is that the hydraulic fluid can
vaporize, which will make it a compressible gas. Then squeezing the
brake will compress the gas, rather than squeeze the brake.

Driving 4 Answers makes clear that he thinks that upgrading to larger
brake rotors is typically useless. Unless the problem is brake fade/heat
dissipation.

As discussed in my bicycle brake document: there is an inverse
relationship between caliper piston travel distance and braking
hydraulic leverage. You want to multiply the input force at the lever.

The master piston will be small, and the caliper piston will be large.
Thus, a large motion/small force at the master piston will become a
small motion/large force at the caliper piston. This large force will
correspond to a lot of friction at the brake rotor.

Driving 4 Answers explicitly recognizes that larger brake rotors does
imply that the same frictional force corresponds to a greater braking
torque. But he says that it isn't that much of a difference (except when
comparing rim brakes to disc brakes on bicycles; rim brakes have better
leverage and thus don't need hydraulic leverage). He says the large
brakes are all about heat dissipation.

He recommends upgrading _tires_ to improve braking distance. That makes
total sense, as this increases the traction of the vehicle.

## Where Does Braking Power Come From?

Ultimately, braking comes from friction. Friction is the coefficient of
friction times the normal force. Notice that the _surface area_ is
unimportant here. Put another way: sliding a 2x4 requires the same force
no matter what face you lie the 2x4 on.

Why?

First, let's note that "contact area" isn't what you think. The surfaces
are jagged. The faces of two surfaces are not in contact. Actually,
their peaks are in contact. So you already can see that surface area
might be somewhat deceptive.

But certainly with more surface area, there are more peaks to interface,
right? Yes.

But how much do the peaks interface with each other? This depends on the
pressure on the peaks. And _that_ depends inversely with the surface
area.

Thus the two factors cancel out, making friction force independent of
(simplified) contact area.

This is just a model, and it's not perfectly true. But it is supposedly
fairly accurate and explains the phenomenon.

Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CyH5xOcsXxs
Source: https://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/307902/why-does-friction-does-not-depend-upon-area-of-contact

## What about tires?

But if that's true, then why does sizing up the tires seem to increase
traction?

Driving 4 Answers explains this. I won't go into detail here, but the
reason relates to the fact that the tire is rubber and can deform.

## Vacuum/Power Brakes

In a car, you want to increase the power of braking. We already talked
about how you can do this with leverage. But leverage always involves a
tradeoff with travel distance. How can we amplify the input force (foot
pressing brake), without increase travel distance of the foot?

I think one answer is larger brake rotors and applying the force at a
greater distance. But that only gets us so far (as Driving 4 Answers
emphasizes).

We can use some power from the engine. We use the engine to create a
vacuum on both sides of a diaphragm, which is connected to the brakes.
The engine naturally wants to suck away air.

When we push the brake pedal, we break a seal one side of the diaphragm.
Air floods into this side of the diaphragm. The air pressure now wants
to push on the diaphragm.

The larger the diaphragm, the more total force will be exerted on it. We
can probably even use the car to run a compressor on the other side so
that we can achieve a pressure of greater than 1 ATM, if we wanted to.

Engineering Explained notes something interesting. Turn off the car
while still rolling. Press the brakes. You'll get one last vacuum
assisted braking. Now release them. Try again. The pressure will have
equalized on both sides to ~1 ATM, and you will no longer have vacuum
assisted braking.

Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LThrL8Jjsgc

## Brake Lines

- Most hydraulic cables for brakes are made of rubber.
- But when pressure at brake lever is applied, it can bend or balloon
  the line. Especially over time the rubber gets more bendy.
- The steel braided lines don't bend or balloon as much, and thus give
  better brake feel. More of the brake lever force is transmitted to the
  pads.
