Holy sweet Jesus. There are so many naming conventions.

## Wheel Diameter

My bicycle wheels are sometimes called 700C (French system). It is more
modernly called **ISO 622**. This is the diameter from the center to the
"bead seats" (where the tire will make contact with the wheel). In road
biking, ISO 622 is by far the most common wheel size.

650B, also called ISO 584, is gaining some popularity on gravel bikes,
which are becoming quite popular.

Mountain bike wheels come in a variety of sizes: 24" (for juniors; ISO
507), 26" (standard up to the 2010s; ISO 559), 27.5" (same as 650B, ISO
584), 29" (same as ISO 622). The idea behind the smaller wheels is
that they are more rugged.

Note that traditional size measurements (700C, 26", et cetera), measured
from one tire-edge to the opposite tire-edge. But this depended on the
tire. It's not a true measurement of the wheel. You can have different
size tires fitting on the same wheel.

Sheldon Brown gives an example. Beach cruisers originally really did
have about 26" in diameter to the tires. But then people started using
smaller tires that were a bit lighter. They were still called 26" tires,
because they fit the old bikes. But now the diameter to the tires was
only 25 5/8". These are your 26" mountain bike tires of today.

So it was all kind of approximate. The real thing you want is the ISO
numbers, which measure to the _bead seat_: where the tire contacts the
wheel.

## Wheel Width

We've talked about the diameter of wheels. What about the width? We want
the inner rim width. This will determine whether a tire has the right
width to fit the wheel.

My Velocity Deep V wheels have an inner rim width of 14mm. The ISO
system thus writes their size as 622x14C (we'll talk about the C in a
moment).

The wheel width tends to not matter that much. The same wheel can
normally accommodate tires of a wider variety of widths. The Deep V
wheels can optimally handle tires between 19-28mm wide they say. The
more important limiting factor tends to be frame clearance for the tire.

Sheldon Brown has a chart that tells you tire width compatibility with
wheel width.

## Wheel Type

Apparently there are "Straight-side" (SS), "Crochet-type" (C), and
"Hooked-bead" (HB) wheels. For the three types, we would write:

- SS 622x14
- 620x14C
- HB 622x14

I do not want to consider these different types at this time though. I
just want to note that a postnominal "C" is part of the ISO designation
for wheels.

## Tire Diameter

Similar to wheels, you need an ISO 622 tire to fit an ISO 622 wheel.
You'll also see traditional measurements like 700C used to describe
tires.

## Tire Width

This is the width of the inflated tire, I suppose at its widest point?
This will vary a bit depending on what width wheel the tire is fitted
to.

I am currently running 25-622 tires. I previously ran 23-622. Note that
my _wheels_ are 622x14C, but my tires are 25-622. The widths are not
supposed to match! That's because for the wheel they measure the
internal rim width, while for the tire they measure the maximum width of
the tire.

Note: the tire is written 25-622, whereas the wheel is written 622x14C.
I guess in the ISO system, this distinguishes a tire and wheel
designation.

Note: tires tend to have a common shape, so a wider tire will also be
taller. This is a reason you can't always run wider tires: the resulting
wheel + tire will have too great a diameter, and not fit your frame.

BTW, in traditional French style, people would write 700x23C.

## Growing Tire Widths

In the past, 23mm wide tires were the standard in road biking. But wider
tires are becoming much more popular. They give a cushier ride, and
appear to have better performance. Even Tour cyclists are adopting wider
tires.

So more and more road cyclists run 28-622. I considered this, but it
wouldn't fit my frame.

## French Designation

We've seen 700C. What does the C mean in this French system?

The French system specified width with a letter: A was narrowest, D was
widest. 700A wheels are obsolete, and had an ISO diameter of 642mm. 700C
has an ISO diameter of 622mm, because the tires are intended to be
wider, so the wheel should be smaller to get to the total diameter
(wheel + tire) of ~700mm.

People started fitting smaller width tires to the same 622 diameter
wheel. Thus the total wheel+tire diameter started to fall below ~700mm.
Both the 700 and the C lost their sense: 700mm wasn't the measurement of
the wheel+tire diameter, and the tire wasn't particularly wide.

Presumably, as 700C tire widths shrunk, so did the wheel widths.

Anyway, prefer the ISO designations to this old French designation.

## Clincher vs Tubeless

You'll hear tires described as "clinchers" often. This is your standard
type. It has the tube inside, and the tire is kind of bulb shaped, where
the edges grab the rim and are retained by it. The edge that crabs the
rim is called the _bead_.

Tubular tires, which are a torus that has been sewn closed around the
inner tube, are used in professional racing. They are lighter, but since
you can't simply replace the tube, you would need to carry a second
tubular tire as an amateur. In professional racing, that's not a problem
because your support carries the tire.

## Sources

- https://www.biketiresdirect.com/common-tire-sizes-article
- https://www.biketiresdirect.com/tire-size-chart-article
- https://www.sheldonbrown.com/tire-sizing.html
- https://www.rei.com/learn/expert-advice/bike-tires.html
