The Drude Model

drude model:

* Electrons are like small particles moving through metallic ions.

* when an electron hits an ion, its new velocity is randomized. it doesn't
  matter the old velocity.

The model assumes that the electric field is uniform and constant.

Also assumes that the thermal velocity of electrons is very high, and
that they can only acquire a very small momentum change dp between
collisions.

We assume that an electron experiences a collision occurs every tau seconds.

If we freeze-frame at time `t`, then an average electron is tau seconds
since the last collision. (Wait: why not tau/2? I guess depends on
distribution?)

The electron thus has gained momentum delta p = q*E*tau. Because the
electric field will apply a force equal to q*E for tau seconds. This is
just like mechanics. If you apply a force to a mass, it will accelerate
at rate F/m. But the *opposite* happens with charge. The greater the
charge the greater the acceleration.

Now, at the time of the last collision, on average an electron has zero
momentum. Basically, it was as likely to be moving *with* the electric
as against it.

Therefore we can imagine that the average momentum of an electron is:

  momentum = q*E*tau

Electric field is the *force* per charge. qE is the force exerted on an
electron.

The *rate* of momentum change is equal to the force acting on the
object. It doesn't matter the mass. Likewise, the momentum change over a
period of time is equal to the force times the time. Again, this doesn't
care about the mass.

Momentum is mass times velocity.

How much kinetic energy is there in the system right now? Kinetic energy
is the work/energy required to accelerate an object from rest to its
current velocity.

The measure of work is the newton meter AKA joule. Why not newton
*second*? Because the amount of work performed by applying a force
depends on the *mass* to which it is being applied.

This is a good note. If I explode some dynamite that releases a certain
amount of energy, which is then transferred to a mass, we know that the
kinetic energy should be equal to the released energy.

Work is the force times distance required to




How much kinetic energy is in the system right now? Kinetic energy is
equal to momentum. So it should be:

    number_of_electrons_in_motion * mass_of_an_electron * velocity_of_an_electron

Great! So now we can ask: how much
