## Introduction

You had wind power, that ran mills and pumps. You had water power, which
also ran mills. Water sawmills also powered saws using a crank and
connecting rod.

You also had steam engines. These could either go through a series of
expansions chambers which drove pistons which rotated a rod. This was
typical of locomotives and early steamships.

You have internal combustion engines. I believe these have pretty good
efficiency. They also have the advantage of fast-start (steam engines
need to boil water). And you don't need to carry water to replenish lost
steam.

Steamships eventually switched to turbines. You can even have
turbo-electric, where turbine is used to produce electricity, which runs
an electric motor which turns the screws. I believe diesel engines have
better fuel efficiency, and maybe are smaller (have less weight), too.

Anyway, I want to discuss how to transform motion into electrical power.

## Magneto

If you have a coil of wire rotating in a fixed magnetic field, an
alternating current will be induced in the wire. For instance, by hydro
power, a **rotor** may be rotated. If the rotor contains a wire, then by
its rotation through a stationary magnetic field (**stator**), a current
will be induced.

(I believe most magnetos have stationary permanent magnets, while most
alternators tend to have rotating magnetic field coils).

A hand-cranked generator that works in this way is called a **magneto**.
A magneto is a kind of **alternator** (device for transforming rotation
into alternating current). However, when one says **alternator**, they
typically mean a device that uses _self-excitation_ to induce the
magnetic field (more on this later).

A major deficiency of the magneto is that the magnetic field is fixed
and cannot vary. Also, I think that magnets cannot generate that much
magnetic flux (that is, the strength of the magnetic field is low).
Thus, they are not useful for high-power applications.

On the other hand, magnetos are commonly used with bicycles. They are
incorrectly called _bicycle dynamos_ in this application. These either
are incorporated at the wheel hub, or make contact with a groved track
in the tire (bottle dynamo).

Sometimes magnetos are used as an ignition system for an internal
combustion engine. This would be the case if for weight or simplicity
reasons you did not want a battery ignition.

## Alternator

An **alternator** is any kind of device used to convert rotational
motion into alternating current. As we've seen, a magneto is a kind of
alternator.

However, when people say "alternator" they normally mean that the
magnetic field is provided by **field coils**, rather than a permanent
magnet. Recall that a coil of wire, through which current is flowing,
will produce a magnetic field (Faraday's law of induction). This is of
course just the other side of the idea that a rotating magnetic field
will induce an alternating current. A coil used to produce a magnetic
field is called a **field coil**.

One advantage of the field coil is that you can vary the magnetic field
(by varying the field current). This will result in different voltage
output of the generator.

Question: since we want the alternator to produce electrical voltage
(current), how will we get the electrical current needed to run the
field coil? This is a kind of bootstrapping problem.

One answer is to use some kind of DC generator to run the field coils.
Note that you want something like a constant current through the field
coils to provide a constant flux magnetic field. This DC generator would
presumably be based on permanent magnets, or else we will not have
solved the problem.

The other approach is **self-excitation**. ("Excitation" just means
generation of a magnetic field through electrical current). We will use
some of the current generated by the rotor to feed the field coils. As
current begins to flow through the field coils, the magnetic field will
build up. More voltage will be generated, which can further drive the
field coils. Eventually, we connect the load to the generator, which can
now power both the load and the field coils.

It appears that you will want to perform some kind of _rectification_
before running the AC output through the field coils. Else, current
through the field coils will reverse. Indeed, this seems to be confirmed
by Stack Overflow.

We've said that the rotor contains the field coils. How will a current
be continuously applied as the rotator moves? The answer is **slip
rings**. These are just a sliding electrical contact. It's just a metal,
conductive ring which is wired into the field coils. Current is applied
to the conductive ring by a stationary roller, which is where the input
voltage is applied. The stationary roller remains in contact with the
ring as it rotates, delivering voltage.

Note that, to complete a circuit, you'll need a _pair_ of slip rings.

Apparently these slip rings are somewhat delicate, and thus it's desired
to apply a lower voltage to them, when possible. This influences putting
the field coil on the rotor of a generator. A relatively low voltage
needs be driven to the field coils, whereas a large voltage will come
off the armature.

Please note that brushes are still used to make contact with the slip
rings. Thus, this is not a brushless design.

Source: https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/599265/does-alternator-self-excitation-require-rectification
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yhu3s1ut3wM

## Dynamos

To produce direct current from a rotating generator, one must use one of
two devices.

One way is **rectification**. This can be done using a **diode bridge**.
Today, we would build this out of semiconductor diodes. However, it
could also be built out of thermionic (vacuum tube) diodes.

See here for a demonstration of a full-bridge rectifier:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diode_bridge. Note that the produced
voltage output follows a pulsing DC current. This can be cleaned up to a
steadier voltage with a capacitor. I won't describe that here.

The other possibility is **commutation**. You can imagine a pair of slip
rings (A and B), each segmented into two halves (A1 and A2, B1 and B2).
One end of the rotor circuit is wired in parallel to A1 and B2, while
the other end of the rotor circuit is wired in parallel to A2 and B1.

Thus, at the start, the circuit is wired into A1 and B1. But, after a
180deg turn, it is wired into B2 and A2. That is: it is wired
_backward_. This is appropriate: as the orientation of the rotor
reverses, it is becomes connected to the circuit in reverse.

## Dynamos vs Alternators

In the beginning, people wanted DC for their devices. Unfortunately, the
alternator was the simpler device. It does not need rectification or
commutation. The slip rings are less prone to wear than the mechanical
commutator.

Also, rectification of large voltage was probably really hard. They
didn't have semiconductor materials. They could use diodes, but those
were probably pretty wasteful. Nowadays, we produce DC from an
alternator simply by solid-state rectification. This is how car
batteries are charged. Solid-state rectification wasn't an option in the
early days.

## Power Transmission

Imagine that you are sending power from a source (a hydroplant) to a
destination (a city). Let's imagine that the hydroplant will charge a
battery, then put the battery on a truck, and then drive it to the city.

If you put very little energy into each battery, then the city will need
to receive batteries at a high rate in order to meet its power demands.
In this analogy, we will presume that the _speed_ of the trucks carrying
the batteries is what costs us energy. It is true that trucks travelling
at higher speeds will experience greater drag forces meaning more energy
will be expended in transit.

If we charge the batteries more fully, then fewer will have to arrive
per second at the city to meet its power demands. We can ship them more
slowly.

Could we not send more trucks per second, with the same charge per
truck? If we assume that trucks are lined up single-file, then the
maximum number of trucks we send per second is equal to the distance
traveled divided by their speed.

Of course, if we add lanes (increase the cross-sectional area of the
wire), we can send more trucks per second. But, if the cross-sectional
area of the wire is fixed (its material costs money, you know), and the
resistivity of the material (the "drag" on electron speed) is fixed,
then we have only one option: send more energy per truck.

This explains why you want to send _high voltage_ on transmission lines.
The current per area is thus minimized, and thus wasted energy is
minimized.

## Power Transformation

Equipment in the home is not going to want to deal with such high
voltage. For one, high voltage would be extremely dangerous. Thus you
will want to **transform** from a higher voltage to a lower voltage.
This steps down the voltage from the high voltage used for transmission
to a more practical voltage for use in the home.

Alternating current transformation can be performed by appropriately
winding input and output wires around a magnetic core. How this works
will be discussed later. But the principle of AC voltage transformation
was understood early, which was why AC power distribution could make
sense: AC could be transmitted long distances at high voltage, and then
stepped down to lower voltage at the destination.

## HVDC Transmission And Conversion

How would high-voltage DC transmission work? It would need to be
transformed. One possibility is to charge batteries in series, then
connect them to the grid in parallel. But this has the disadvantage of a
charge/discharge cycle, and is not efficient.

You can of course run a solid-state inverter to produce AC, then step
down using an AC transformer, then run a rectifier.

An electro-mechanical version would be to run a DC motor, then use this
to power a DC generator. You could use either gearing to change the
rotational speed and torque, which would result in a different voltage.

## Two Phase Power

We have examined single phase power generation. Single phase power can
be distributed using two wires. However, we can note that single phase
power generation is not constant through the cycle of the rotor. At a
certain orientation, the magnetic field is orthogonal to the stator
coil, producing no voltage. At this moment, there exists no voltage,
thus no power generation.

We may imagine two coils placed orthogonally. Then, the voltage created
by one coil reaches its maximum exactly when the other coil has zero
voltage.

What is the power delivery? Recall that instantaneous power is V=IR and
P=IV=V^2/R. The voltage on one phase is cos(theta)V while the other
phase delivers sin(theta)V voltage. Thus, provided that the loads are
balanced, the power delivered is $(cos^2(theta) +
sin^2(theta))V^2/R=V^2/R$.

Thus the power being output is constant, though the instantaneous power
is out-of-phase by 90deg on each of the two circuits.

A second major advantage of two-phase power is that it allows the simple
creation of a rotating magnetic field. This allows a motor at rest to be
"self-started." This was an important consideration for industrial
applications and for trains. But this is something that should be
discussed later.

Two phase power is most typically implemented using two pairs of wires:
four wires total. However, it can be implemented with _three_ wires. The
third wire is the return wire, but it needs to be able to handle a peak
current of `sqrt(2)` observed in either one of the phases.

We shall soon see that three-phase power has some advantages over
two-phase, which is why two-phase was very quickly supplanted by
three-phase.

Let's compare two-phase power to single-phase power. Assume the
four-wire version of two-phase. Then two-phase delivers twice the power
(each of two phases generates as much power as a single-phase), but uses
twice the wires. Thus, compared to single-phase, the efficiency of power
delivered to conductive material is not improved: 2x/2x.

If we use the three-wire version of two-phase, then we have an
efficiency improvement. It is 2x/`(2+sqrt(2))/2`x: 1.17x.

## Three-Phase Power

Consider three phase power. This is generated using coils that are
120deg out of phase. Thus the voltage generated is always 120deg out of
phase.

Now, imagine that each coil is connected to an equivalent load. Then
note that the currents driven are each described by sine waves 120deg
out of phase.

I've proven in my algebra/imaginary number notes that the sum of nth
roots of unity is zero. Thus, the sum of the three currents is zero.

That means that the current driven by coil one is equal and opposite to
the sum of the currents driven by coils two and three.

So we wire the three coils together at the center of the rotor. The
three outputs of the generator can now also be wired together.
Everything will balance properly.

This suggests that we do not need six transmission wires, but only
three. We can complete each coil circuit by cleverly wiring into the
others. Here is a good visualization:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-phase_electric_power#/media/File:3-phase_flow.gif

Three phase power gives us the constant power output that we would get
from two-phase power, as well as lets us create a rotating magnetic
field easily.

The

**Efficiency**

Let's compare three-phase power to single-phase power. The three-phases
deliver 3x the power (each of three phase generates as much power as a
single-phase).

If we wired with 6 wires, this would be 3x the conductive material. The
efficiency of power delivered to conductive material would not have
improved: 3x/3x.

If we use the 3 wire arrangement, we have increased our power delivery
by 3x while only using 1.5x more wires. Thus, compared to single-phase,
the efficiency of power delivered to conductive material has improved
2x.

In general, we can deliver N phases using N wires. Comparing to
single-phase, all such systems have Nx the power delivery using N/2x
conductive material. Thus all polyphase systems have 2x efficiency.

TODO: Why does this argument not apply for two-phases 180deg out of
phase?

## Single-Phase Three Wire For Home Delivery

Three-phase power lines are used for long-range transmission, and for
heavy machinery. In the home, single-phase alternating current is used.

Here is how it works. As seen from the above gif, the red, green, and
blue loads are all seeing 60Hz alternating current. The voltage is the
transmission voltage, which is very high.

The circuit to the home is wired with a voltage transformer to step down
the voltage. The transformer steps down to single-phase 240V AC. This is
the hot-to-hot voltage.

To make things sophisticated, there is a **center-tap** of the coil on
the home side of the transformer. This center tap is at the center point
of the inductor coil, and is wired to ground. Throughout the home, each
two-prong receptacle has one hot receptacle and one neutral receptacle.
The neutral receptacles are all wired to ground. Half the outlets in the
house will be wired to hot #1, and the other half to hot #2.

You can go ahead and touch the neutral receptacle directly; it should
have no voltage because it is wired to ground. If you touch the hot
receptacle (and are yourself grounded), you'll receive a 120V shock.
Note that the hots in half the outlets will be 180deg out of phase with
the hots in the other half.

Note, this is _not_ two-phase power. The two lines are 180deg out of
phase. You cannot create a rotating magnetic field like this.

In the breaker box, each circuit of the home bridges one live wire and
the neutral. Half the circuits of the home are connected to one live,
while the other half are connected to the other. There is 120V AC
throughout the home.

The exception is high-voltage equipment, which bridges the two live
wires. These circuits receive 240V AC.

Let's quickly note why the voltage is 120V on each circuit. Instead of
considering a single inductor with a center tap, you can consider _two_
inductors, each with half the windings, each grounded to earth. Then
it's clear that the voltage induced will be 120V, and not 240V.

But maybe it's slightly more complicated if we consider that the two
earths are really the same earth? If there is no load on circuit A, is
there still not an electrical path through both inductors, load B, and
back to earth? That is, isn't there a path through 240V of inductors and
through a load B?

Yes, there is such a path, but it is not the _only_ path. Imagine that a
stream is flowing down hill. You dig an alternative path that takes the
stream up a mountain, and then back down, where it rejoins the stream.
Will water run up the mountain simply because there is a path up it?

Note that going up the mountain might have net-zero energy cost
(ignoring friction), since kinetic energy of the stream's water would be
converted to potential energy, and then back to kinetic energy.

Still, even in this idealized scenario, no water will flow up the
mountain. Likewise for the current through an unloaded circuit A; it
will not want to flow through circuit B when it could simply immediately
return to ground.

We could probably analyze this further to really clarify, but this is
sufficient for now.

## Power Phases In US and Europe

- In Europe, three-phase power is 400V live-to-live.
  - In a three-phase system, live-to-live voltage `sqrt(3)`x the voltage
    of a single phase.
  - Thus, `400V/sqrt(3)` gives a voltage of 230V.
  - Thus you have "230/400V" power.
  - Note: for residential supply, I think you use _four_ wires. This
    lets you just give each household a phase.
- In US, it looks like a common three-phase power is 120/208V.
  - TODO: But how does that get transformed to 120/240V split-phase
    power?

## Synchronous Motor

The prototype of a synchronous motor could be a permanent-magnet
synchronous motor. This is like a reverse-magneto. The rotor is trying
to create a fixed magnetic field, but the stator is creating (assuming
three-phase power) a rotating magnetic field.

Else, the rotor can have field coils. You can provide voltage via
slip-rings. You will want to use rectification to generate DC for the
field coils. You may also achieve a _brushless_ motor if you _induce_
current in the motor with the changing magnetic field, rectifying this,
and using it to drive field coils.

One downside to the synchronous motor is that it can be difficult to
start. In the beginning, you have no rotation of the shaft, but the
stator is rotating the magnetic field. But this can only effectively
drag the shaft if it is rotating at approximately the same rate as the
motor. We say that the motor is not _self-starting_.

How do you start the motor? One way is to use _variable frequency
drive_; this allows for control of the frequency fed to the stator
coils.

Another way is to use an _induction motor_ (discussed soon) to start the
motor. I believe this is the most common approach.

I believe that a synchronous motor will try to maintain a constant RPM,
even as load torque is increased. However, if the load is too great,
then the rotor will fall behind the magnetic field, and the motor will
stop working.

This is another reason why an induction motor is often also used. As the
rotor starts to _slip_, it will apply a torque to bring it up to speed.

## TODO

- How an AC power transformer works.
- Brushless Generator.
- Motors: induction and synchronous.
  - I believe I've been describing _synchronous generators_. However,
    there are _asynchronous generators_, which are just induction motors
    run in reverse.
- Brushless AC motor.
- Induction motors.
  - Squirrel cage
  - Wound Rotor
- Brushless DC motors.
  - Hall effect sensor?
- Inverter.
