## Watts, Ohms, Amps, Volts

Coulumb is the measure of charge. Amps is a rate of flow of charge
equal to one coulumb per second. A conductor is a material which can
experience a flow of charge through it. Conductive objects are full of
moveable electrical charge.

An amp is like a gallon per second. A coulumb is like a gallon.

So what is charge? Any conductor is full of moveable charges. In
metals, the outermost electrons don't orbit the atom, but drift around
throughout the solid metal. But the net charge is zero, because each
electron floating around has a proton for it. Note: he says that
charges literally slosh around!

Amperes is the rate of flow of charges. It can be a fast flow through
a narrow gauge wire or a slower flow through a thicker gauge.

Generators are "charge pumps" Imagine a coiled wire. Push a magnet
through it, it will make the charges rotate. This is effectively what
a generator does. Note that it takes a complete circuit for this to
work for a generator.

A battery can also do this. Note that you can insert a battery on
either side of a broken circuit. I would guess that a battery has an
excess of negative charge on one side.

He mentions that of course you can put a lightbulb into the circuit,
and the filament will resist and glow hot. But he hasn't yet described
what resistance is.

He next talks about *watts* which are a flow of *energy*. This is
different from *amperage* which is a flow of *charge*. Energy is
measured in terms of Joules. So a Watt is a quantity of energy flow
per second. It is measured in Joules/sec, which is the definition of a
Watt. Just like amps measure *current*, watts measure *power*, which
is the name for energy flow. But he advises not to yet think in terms
of the word "power" which is as yet mysterious.

Note a difference between electrical current and energy current. A
battery's energy flows out of the battery and to the lightbulb, where
it is disipated in heat. On the other hand, electrons flow out of the
battery, but are returned to the other side.

I don't totally get his explanation of *what* energy is. He says it
flows in the space around the writes, that it is like an
electromagnetic field moving around the wire. What?

I guess if you think of Joules as calories, then power is the rate at
which the circuit burns calories. What is the nature of the electrical
calories, and why do they want to escape and be expended?

What is volts? Voltage is caused by an excess of electrons one place,
and too little another place. Voltage is the electrical field created,
which is like the pressure to move an electron from one side to the
other. A battery has exactly this scenario.

When you hook a battery up to a wire, it immediately starts pushing on
the electrons on one side. These do not necessarily move very fast
(they don't), but there does instantaneously exist a field through the
wire where all electrons want to move from the negative terminal to
the positive.

Weird note. Imagine a tank of water with a hose out the bottom. If you
double the length of hose, you'll halve the rate of out-flow, because
of the increased friction of the hose. Weird!

Ohms is the friction of a wire. If you double the length of wire,
you'll halve the amps flowing. This is Ohm's law.

But V=IR seems to have nothing to do with Joules and Watts. But Joules
are lost/consumed whenever you push some charge through a
resistor. The more charge you push through a resistor, the more energy
is lost. And the if it takes more voltage to push through the same
charge, proportionally more energy is lost. Thus
`Voltage*Charge=Energy`. Of course, we can likewise write:
`Voltage*Current=Power`.

This is a little weird to me. Let's say you ahve a truck going up a
hill. If you double the truck's weight, then you double the amount of
energy needed to bring it up the hill. But why is it that if you
double the *voltage*, you double the energy expenditure? **I guess the
question is: what is the voltage in this analogy?**

**TODO**: I think this is my central problem in understanding!

But of course `I=V/R`. Which means `V**2/R=Power`. This will totally
make sense, I assume, when I internalize `E=VQ` (Q is charge and V is
voltage and E is energy).

But `V=E/Q` is the definition of voltage. Voltage is equal to the
amount of energy required to move a certain amount of charge from one
side to the other.

Source: http://amasci.com/elect/vwatt1.html
