## Coulomb

A *coulomb* of charge is defined as the equivalent charge to 6.241509074
x 10^18 electrons.

The coulomb is just a reference number. It's similar to how a *mole* of
copper is equivalent to 6.02214076 x 10^23 copper atoms.

## Joules

A joule is a measure of energy. It is defined as the amount of energy
required to apply a force of one Newton to an object through a distance
of one meter.

Energy can be stored as *potential* energy in many ways. A mass hung
from a tree represents a certain amount of potential energy. If you
allowed the mass to fall to the ground, the difference in gravitational
potential energy might in theory be used for some purpose.

Likewise, if you have two chemicals that, when mixed, release a certain
amount of heat (AKA, kinetic energy), that potential energy can also be
measured in joules.

Stored energy is always defined in terms of two reference states.

## Voltage

Voltage measures the difference in *potential energy* when you move an
electron from one location to another. For instance, it would be the
amount of *work* (energy expended) required to move a test charge from
point A to point B in an electric field.

Voltage is a measure of energy *per charge*.

When a battery has a higher voltage, it means that each electron that
moves through a connected circuit can do more work.

The measure of voltage is the *volt*. One volt of potential difference
is defined as the ability to do *one joule of work* per *coulomb of
charge*.

## Current

Current is simply how many electrons are moving through a cross-section
of space at a given time.

The measure of current is the *ampere* (aka *amp*). One ampere of
current means that *one coulomb* of charge travels through the
cross-section *each second*.

## Shorting a battery

If we connect a battery to a circuit, what will be the current?

Imagine *shorting* a battery: connecting the two terminals with an
idealized wire. The rate at which electrons can flow from one terminal
to the other is limited by the speed that the oxidization and reduction
reactions can occur in the battery.

What could slow down the oxidization/reduction half reactions? Surface
area of the cathode and anode, perhaps. Speed at which ions can flow in
the salt bridge?

We could imagine an ideal battery without those constraints. If the
oxidization/reduction half reactions were able to proceed as fast as
desired, then current could likewise travel fast as desired through the
idealized wire.

Question: where would the *energy* released by the battery go?
Presumably parts of the battery/circuit system which are energetically
unfavorable would *consume* energy, while parts of the battery/circuit
system which are energetically favorable would *release* energy.

If we know our battery has one joule of potential energy stored within
it, shorting the battery should release that one joule of energy.
Presumably the joule is released through waste heat from the exothermic
reaction in the battery.

## Resistance

Voltage is energy per charge. So we can think of it as energy per mass.



Electrons do not want to effortlessly move through a wire. To get them
moving requires an expenditure of energy.

Imagine a mass that is moving on a frictioned surface.

Kinetic friction is equal to the normal force times the coefficient of friction.

Which is to say that kinetic friction is proportional to the mass.

