## tl;dr

Bonds do not "contain" energy. Breaking bonds does not release
energy. It consumes energy.

## Bond Formation and Energy

When a bond forms where there wasn't one, potential energy is
converted to kinetic energy. That's because there is some force that
wants to draw the atoms together. The action of this force, over a
distance, accelerates the atoms.

That energy has to be put somewhere. The simplest solution is that the
accelerated atoms bounce into other crap, imparting kinetic energy to
other parts of the system. This is interpreted as heat.

If that energy is put nowhere, then the atoms will break apart and the
bond is broken.

The reverse is true: to break bonds, we need to input energy to shake
up the atoms. Breaking bonds consumes kinetic energy.

It isn't true that chemical bonds "store" energy.

## Exothermic Reaction

A reaction in which only bonds are formed is necessarily exothermic:
energy is converted into kinetic energy, which can be used for work.

Note that an exothermic reaction might take some energy to get
started. For instance, say you mix hydrogen H\_2 gas with oxygen O\_2
gas. This can produce H\_2O plus some net energy. But first you have
to break the existing bonds.

The energy released in forming two covalent bonds between two
hydrogens and an oxygen is greater than the energy required to break
the H\_2 and O\_2 bonds. Note, however, that we do need some energy to
break the H\_2, O\_2 bonds. They won't break spontaneously.

So we put in some energy to start breaking the hydrogen and oxygen
bonds. They form H\_2O, the formation of which releases even more
energy, which can be used to break more hydrogen and oxygen bonds and
continue the reaction until the inputs are exhausted.

Overall, the reaction is exothermic because it releases more energy
than is needed to start it. However, the reaction will not
spontaneously take place without some additional energy (which can be
as simple as some velocity on the constituents; that is, heat).

## Energy Storage

We could ask: since you can burn methane in oxygen, producing energy,
doesn't it make sense to say that the methane "stores" energy? Is it a
chemical property - of methane alone - that determines how much energy
can be extracted from it?

I think the answer is *no*. There is a "standard enthalpy of
combustion," which tells you how much energy is released when the
methane is combusted with oxygen. But that is specific in relation to
oxygen.

Likewise there is an "enthalpy of construction." This is the change in
enthalpy when 1 mole of the substance forms from its constituent
elements in their "standard state." I think the temperature and
pressure matter, and these are assumed to be standard values.

Likewise, biologists sometimes say that energy is made available by
the breakdown of sugar. But the chemical truth is that the energy is
made available by the production of strong bonds in the products. The
breakdown of the sugar, of course, *takes* energy.

## Endothermic Reactions

We've talked about exothermic reactions. But what about *endothermic*
reactions? Those involve spending more energy to break bonds then can
be harvested by forming new ones. Why would such a reaction ever
happen?

First, it is true that we need to supply energy to the system to keep
the reaction going. If we stop supplying energy, the reaction will
stop.

Presumably we supply the initial energy, shaking the molecules and
breaking the original bonds. Why do they not just reconstitute the
original reactants? Because then they would have the same kinetic
energy afterwards, and be torn apart again.

I believe this describes the melting of solid ice to liquid
water. Kinetic energy is transfered to the ice, shaking the H2O
molecules out of the ice latice. They cannot stably remain in the
latice without wandering off. The ice cannot simply reform, because
the H2O molecules have too much heat to stay in the latice stably.

## Entropy vs Exo/Endothermic

We typically presume that exothermic reactions will "spontaneously"
occur. Of course, we saw that this isn't necessarily true without some
input energy to start the reaction. But why would endothermic
reactions ever occur?

Imagine ice melting. Why did it do that? For the system (the ice) to
run the process (melt), energy had to be transfered from the
surroundings (the universe) to the system (the ice). But isn't that
unfavorable?

But energy transfer cannot be the whole story of whether something
will spontaneously occur or not. If we reverse our conception of "the
system" and "the surroundings," it will flip whether we see an
endothermic or an exothermic process taking place. This shows that we
need to know something about the system *and* the surroundings.

Ice in a hot universe will spontaneously melt, even though this is an
endothermic process. Whereas water in a cold universe will want to
freeze (an exothermic process). The fact that heat is transfered in
one direction or another is not enough to say which process will
occur.

The answer is to inquire whether total **entropy** (both of the system
and of the surroundings) is increased or decreased. Entropy is always
non-decreasing. When total entropy change is zero, the process is
reversable. When entropy change is positive, the process is
irreversable and in fact spontaneous.

The second law of thermodynamics (that entropy is always increasing)
outlaws many things that would *not* violate conservation of energy.

In particular, the second law forbids that, all else equal, heat never
flows from a cold region to a hot region. A simpler example: two ideal
gases mix together, not because that is energetically prefered, but
simply because processes that increase entropy are spontaneously
preferred. Note also that in this gas scenario, the temperature of the
gases is not relevant in order for the mixing to take place.

Source: https://chemistry.stackexchange.com/questions/149367/does-the-entropy-of-a-chemical-system-increase-in-an-endothermic-reaction

## Entropy vs Enthalpy vs Gibbs Energy

tl;dr: these are just a bunch of words. But I wish I knew better what
they mean, and I try to explain here.

Enthalpy is the sum of "internal energy" and the product of pressure
and volume. Internal energy is relative to a reference state. A system
with many bonds will have negative internal energy when compared to a
system without those bonds. As for pressure and volume, we often
assume those are held constant; in that case, enthalpy is basically
heat transfer out of the system.

Exothermic reactions result in a negative change in enthalpy. The
internal energy decreases (as bonds are formed), and this is then
transfered to the outside either as heat. Endothermic reactions give a
negative change in enthalpy.

In a closed system, where heat cannot be transfered out, will a
reaction take place? Only if it decreases **Gibbs energy**. Gibbs
energy is enthalpy minus temperature times entropy. Consider the
mixing of gases; the enthalpy remains the same. However, the Gibbs
energy will decrease through the mixing. Why? Because the **entropy**
is increased.

Reactions that reduce Gibbs energy (and thus occur spontaneously in
closed systems) are called **exergonic**. Reactions that increase
Gibbs energy are called **endergonic**.

BTW, Gibbs energy used to be called free energy. But there are
actually two kinds: Gibbs energy and Helmholtz energy. So people
didn't want to use the word "free" anymore.

The entropy is some kind of measure of uniformity or disorder. I can't
define it presently.

## What Kind Of Energy Exists In Chemical Bonds?

People tend to describe chemical bonding in electrostatic terms. That
is, they want to talk about the distance of electrons and protons. But
I hear other people say there is something something quantum going
on. That would make more sense in terms of something about sharing
orbitals.

## Sources

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3-Baa2yofyk
- https://www.wired.com/2015/12/we-need-to-talk-about-the-energy-in-chemical-bonds/
- https://www.wtamu.edu/~cbaird/sq/2013/06/27/when-does-the-breaking-of-chemical-bonds-release-energy/
  - This is probably the highest quality source.
- https://chem.libretexts.org/Courses/University_of_Kentucky/UK%3A_CHE_103_-_Chemistry_for_Allied_Health_(Soult)/Chapters/Chapter_11%3A_Properties_of_Reactions/11.4%3A_Entropy_and_Enthalpy#:~:text=If%20the%20drive%20toward%20lower,of%20energy%20than%20the%20reactants.
  - Kind of okay, but introduces the concept of entropy but doesn't
    say anything about it?
