## Energy Generation

We know that electrical power can be produced by turning a generator.

Hydropower converts gravitational potential energy into electrical power
by forcing it through a turbine generator.

Wind power takes the kinetic energy of air currents to turn a turbine
generator.

Similarly, you can use the power of tides to turn turbines.

We can then talk about solar power. Photovoltaic solar directly converts
electromagnetic radiation to voltage - somehow. I don't understand how.

The other form of solar power is concentrated solar power. Here, EMR is
focused using mirrors on a central point, which is then heated.

This now takes us to our next series of power generation methods: heat
engines. It's not obvious how turn heat energy into anything useful.

The most typical heat engine is the _steam turbine_. Here, water is
boiled (by heating) and this rises through a turbine which turns as
steam flows through it.

Let's consider various ways to create heat:

- Burning fossil fuels like coal, petroleum, or natural gas,
- Burning biomass,
- Running a nuclear reactor, which generates heat,
- Geothermal power (pumping of hot water from deep underground).

**Heat Engines**

Let us say that you have a hot reservoir and a cold reservoir. We know
that heat will tend to flow from the hot reservoir to the cold reservoir
if some means to do so is introduced. For instance, a thermal conductor.

The question is: can we make this transfer of heat energy do work for
us? A machine that extracts useful work from the transfer of heat is
called a _heat engine_.

To transfer the heat energy, you will typically have a _working fluid_.
This may be a gas which expands/contracts (gas turbines, petrol/diesel
engines), or a liquid that undergoes phase-change to a gas (steam
engines and turbines).

Note that you must reach a critical temperature for some thermodynamic
cycles to initiate. For instance, you can't make any power from a steam
engine until you've heated water enough to boil and produce steam.

What if your heat reservoir is at a temperature _lower_ than the boiling
point of water? For instance, hot water pumped from the earth may not be
at boiling point. One possibility is to pass it through a heat exchanger
to impart heat to a working fluid with a lower boiling point, like a
refrigerant.

**Weird Engines**

- Photovoltaic, like we said,
- Thermoelectric generators: convert a temperature difference directly
  to electricity via the "Seebeck effect"
  - Can be used to also create a temperature difference via electricity
    alone.
  - No moving parts.
  - This is how space probes power themselves. They have a radioisotope
    that decays, creating heat. This then is used to produce the heat
    flux across the Seebeck generator plates. That drives current.

**TODO: HEAT ENGINES**

- Carnot engine
- Gas turbine
- Steam engine
- Steam turbine
- Stirling
- Reciprocating piston engine

**TODO: THERMODYNAMIC CYCLES**

- Carnot cycle
- Rankine (steam engine)
- Stirling cycle
- Brayton cycle
- Diesel cycle
- Otto Cycle

## Energy Storage

Some methods of energy production allow you to control when the energy
is produced. Others, like solar, wind, or tidal energy cannot
necessarily always generate electricity on demand.

Note that for fossil fuels, the storage is in the fuel to be burned.

**Mechanical**

In the case of hydro, the reservoir behind a dam represents stored
energy. Moreover, you can use electricity to run pumps to raise water
into a reservoir, which is now available to do work when released back
through a turbine.

Another method is to compress air. You might compress air by shoving it
down into underground reservoirs.

You can run flywheels. Or literally you can lift up weights in mine
shafts that can then later be released.

**Thermal**

You can heat water and store it in a pool. You can literally run
electricity through a resistor to store electrical power as heat this
way.

I think these systems are most effective if you want hot water, hot
steam, or cold air (from ice) later. Then you are storing literally a
fluid that you need, and you won't have to produce electricity from it
again.

**Electrochemical**

Rechargeable battery, capacitors.

**Chemical**

Basically, you can use electricity to separate hydrogen from water
(electrolysis), or to combine and carbon-dioxide to produce methane.
These are now fuels that can be burned. Burning hydrogen does not
produce carbon-dioxide.

Note that hydrogen does not need to be combusted directly to produce
heat, but instead you can use fuel cells, which produce electricity
directly (somehow).
