**Background**

In 1959 there was a discovery of a huge natural gas field in the
Netherlands. There was an observed decline in the manufacturing sector.
The Economist named this Dutch Disease in 1977.

Dutch Disease is one explanation for the *resource curse*.

**Mechanism**

There are three sectors:

0. A non-traded services sector,
0. An internationally traded manufacturing or agricultural sector,
0. An internationally traded resource extraction sector.

The phenomenon occurs when the resource extraction sector is booming.
The *direct deindustrialization* effect is that the resource extraction
sector draws workers away from the services and
manufacturing/agricultural sectors. This can be a negligible effect if
resource extraction is not labor intensive.

However, one imagines that direct deindustrialization due to *capital*
shifts might be significant?

A second effect is *indirect deindustrialization*, called the *spending
effect*. The resource extraction sector generates international cash
inflows to the country. This wealth is then spent inside the country on
the services sector. This again draws away from the export-oriented
manufacturing/agricultural sectors.

The price for exported manufacturing/agricultural goods cannot increase
simply due to increase in-country wealth, because those prices are set
internationally.

**Minimization**

One way to address Dutch Disease is to not repatriate income earned
abroad selling resources. Income can be stored in sovereign wealth funds
and invested abroad.

Another method to combat Dutch Disease is to increase saving. This can
be done by running a budget surplus (confiscation?), or by reducing
taxation on profit-generating activity (income, capital gains taxes).

**More Foreign Currency => Greater Wealth?**

Another equivalent way to explain Dutch Disease is in terms of foreign
exchange rates. In fact, this is probably a clearer explanation of what
is happening.

We expect that if resources are discovered, the currency will appreciate
in value, because there is more foreign demand for the currency so that
it can be used to purchase the resource. Intuition check: the currency's
value internationally depends on whether the country produces anything
the rest of the world wants (it also depends on if the world produces
anything the country wants).

I've previously described the spending effect as deriving from increased
wealth. But greater foreign currency reserves is not per se wealth. This
is what I want to explore.

**More Foreign Currency => Fewer Other Exports => Leftover Production Capacity**

Simply: presuming the country buys products abroad, those prices will
get cheaper. That means the country needs to export fewer of its own
products to import the same products as previously.

This could lead directly to deindustrialization in export industries. At
the same time, it lowers the cost to produce everything else in the
country because there is more spare production capacity.

Caveat: if it is difficult to retool/retrain, less wealth can be
harnessed through this mechanism. (This is common to the other
mechanisms I explore.)

The effect of this mechanism is attenuated because increased natural
resource exports doesn't necessarily imply that manufacturing exports
must fall. There isn't any "cap" on exports.

**More Foreign Currency => Consumer Substitution**

With more/cheaper foreign currency, consumers can substitute some
internally produced goods with goods purchased abroad. For instance, the
country may produce fewer agricultural products for domestic consumption
and import more of those products from abroad. This will directly hurt
industries that compete with imports from abroad.

By decreasing the amount of internal demand for these goods, capital and
workers are freed up for other sectors. This benefits both the internal
sectors and the manufacturing export sectors through lower labor/capital
costs.

However, there is also a wealth effect. Consumers have leftover money to
spend internally, so they will spend it on internal, consumer-oriented
sectors. This raises prices in those sectors, which increases
capital/labor costs in the country generally. The internal sectors
aren't hurt by the increased costs, since this is balanced by increased
prices. However, manufacturing exporters are hurt because their prices
*do not* rise, since these are prices on an international market.

This mechanism suggests that consumer industries that compete abroad
will be hurt, but consumer industries that are primarily domestic will
boom. Exporters are hurt by this mechanism because prices rise. It may
be that relatively small changes in export production costs could
devastate the competitiveness of exporters.

This mechanism can be attenuated by simply not repatriating wealth. The
country could build foreign currency reserves or invest in assets
outside the country. That leads to lower investment in the local economy
though. The country would like to use the resource blessing to build its
economy.

The country can also encourage greater savings. Instead of spending
leftover cash in consumer industries, the cash can be used for
investment in all industries (internal and export).

Note that the effect here is attenuated if there is not significant
*substitution*. If imports are restricted to only goods that do not
compete with the internal market, then there is no reorganization of the
internal economy. This may be an unlikely scenario. Note again that it
will not lead directly to investment in the domestic economy.

**More Foreign Currency => Decreased Input Costs => More Productive Capacity**

With a stronger currency, domestic-oriented industries may be able to
purchase production inputs more cheaply internationally. These
industries will be more profitable, and will attract internal capital
away from other industries so that they can scale up.

This effect is attenuated if production inputs cannot be economically
imported. It is also attenuated in industries where additional scale is
not particularly desired.

## Long Term Impacts

Dutch Disease is a "problem" insofar as manufacturing exports are hurt,
and insofar as natural resource exports are volatile.
Deindustrialization may cause dislocation in the labor force, also.

Dutch Disease may be attenuated if foreign capital (and workers) are
allowed to flow in? In this case, capital and workers do not need to be
taken away from the other export industries: they can flow in from
abroad.

I think simply monetary union won't help, if capital and people cannot
travel.
