## Mutual funds

In a **mutual fund**, investors pool together money which is invested by
professional managers. By pooling together, the fund has access to
opportunities individuals would not have. Moreover, because the fund has
a greater pool of capital, it can divide its investments to achieve
better diversification.

Mutual funds can be either actively managed or passively managed (track
an index). They also can have different structures.

## Closed-end Funds

A **closed-end fund** is one which issues shares initially to collect
capital, but then subsequently manages that capital behalf of owners of
the shares. The shares can then trade on an exchange. Originally, this
was the most common form of mutual fund.

Closed-end funds do not allow individuals to redeem their capital. They
are also not open to new investment. By being closed, the fund does not
need to worry about investors withdrawing their money. Thus they can
invest in assets that are harder to liquidate. They can also keep less
cash on hand, because they do not need to do redemptions.


The **net asset value** (NAV) is basically the worth of the assets of
the fund divided by the number of shares. One expects that the fund
would trade at NAV, but there is sometimes a premium or (more often)
discount. This reflects confidence in the managers, for instance.

Closed-end funds can in theory be less responsive to investor pressure.
The manager can own securities that the investors want to sell and not
risk redemption. An investor who wants to get out of the fund must sell
it on the market; they can't redeem the money from the manager.

For these reasons, closed-end funds may have higher yields than open-end
funds (no need to manage redemptions). However, they may also be subject
to greater volatility (may not be priced to NAV).

To acquire more assets to manage, closed-end funds can take on debt, or
they can also sometimes issue new shares (preferred shares?). I assume
they are more able to take on debt than open-end funds because they
won't need to liquidate depreciated positions just to meet redemptions.

(I don't think there would be any reason to run a closed-end index
fund?)

Closed-end funds are about 1% of the industry.

## Open-end funds

In an open-end fund, you can buy or redeem shares at (almost) any time.
The fund offers to buy or sell at NAV. Typically sales/purchases happen
at the end of each day. There is no intra-day trading. (In fact I think
a 2003 scandal was that some funds were letting some participants trade
before the end of the day.)

Open-end funds are so common that they are often used synonymously with
"mutual fund."

Most funds are actively managed, but they can also be passively managed.

In buying shares, there may be a charge (or "load"). If you charge on
purchase, this is "front-end load." If you charge on sale, this is a
"close-end load." If there are no fees for buying/selling, then it is a
"no-load fund."

Because redemptions are always possible, open-end funds cannot be hold
assets that are too illiquid. And they must also keep cash on hand to
manage redemptions, limiting capital deployed.

If an open-end fund cannot use more investment, it can become a
closed-end fund.

Open-end funds are about 84% of the industry.

## Hedge funds

Hedge funds are often open-ended and actively managed. However,
redemption is much more limited. This lets hedge funds in theory invest
in less liquid assets. However, hedge funds can only take money from
accredited investors.

## Exchange Traded Funds

Like a closed-end fund, an **exchange traded fund** (ETF) issues shares,
and manages the capital. Almost all ETFs target an index (in 2012 $1.2T
index ETFs, $7B active ETFs).

New shares can be issued though. An "authorized party" (a broker) can
create new shares of the ETF. They do this by buying the securities the
ETF holds, and doing an in-kind swap of the securities for new shares in
the ETF. Notice how the ETF is not taking in cash. Likewise, to *redeem*
shares, the ETF will do an in-kind swap. So ETFs don't need to have a
lot of cash on hand.

The authorized parties are basically arbitrageurs, who will keep the
trading price of the ETF close to NAV. Market participants will mostly
trade ETF shares on the open market, but the arbitrageurs can buy up
shares (or sell out shares) if market pressures cause the ETF price to
depart from NAV.

ETFs are typically tax efficient. Index funds (in general) are tax
efficient because tracking an index means a relatively low turnover of
portfolio securities. But also since ETFs never need to liquidate in
order to meet redemptions, they never need to sell out of a gained
position for that reason.

Because ETFs trade throughout the day, you can trade stock options on
ETFs. You can do shorts, limit orders, top-losses, margin buying...

## Recognition of Gains

Mutual funds and ETFs both must pay collected dividends monthly. They
also must distribute capital gains each December.

All index funds typically produce few capital gains, but ETFs can be
lower because they don't do redemptions.

This is because ETFs are structured just like open-end mutual funds:
they are registered investment companies. These are pass-through
entities.

## Index Mutual Funds vs ETFs Summary

* We already talked about capital gains.
* Index mutual funds typically have higher expense ratios (why?).
* ETFs have lower minimums, but you can't buy fractional shares of ETFs.
* ETFs are more flexible (trading through day, options, derivatves).
* ETFs might require commisions to trade (not anymore though...).
* ETFs are ever so slightly slower to reinvest dividends. You need to
  receive the dividend, then buy new shares...

It sounds like (especially in tax-advantaged accounts), ETF vs index
fund makes little difference.

## Indexing Thesis

* You're only paid to hold non-diversifiable risk.
* You don't know what stocks to buy, nor when to buy them. You aren't
  smart.
* Most "smart" people (active managers) can't beat an index (especially
  when adjusted for risk).
* The best active managers don't need your money. In fact, most
  successful active strategies cannot leverage large amounts of capital.
* Anyway, active managers should just eat up all the returns they bring
  to the table.
* Important indexing note: I think a very small number of stocks is
  responsible for almost all the appreciation in an index. So it's
  important to buy them all.

## Bond Funds

Any fund type can invest in bonds or equities. However, because bonds
trade with much less liquidity than equities, bond funds can have a
harder time meeting redepemption requests than equity funds. The logic
is that if you dump a bunch of stocks, you'll have an easier time
getting fair value (not paying a huge liquidity premium) than if you
dump a bunch of bonds.

There is a claim that bond ETFs have less liquidity risk than bond
mutual funds. The idea is that you get out of the bond fund ETF by
selling into the market for ETF shares. That doesn't ipso facto cause
any trading in the underlying bonds. Yes, authorized parties can
ultimately reclaim the underlying bonds and try to sell them themselves.

Eventually, if the public sells a bond ETF hard enough, there will start
to be a liquidity premium that must be paid to liquidate more. But the
ride may be smoother than with a bond mutual fund.

Apparently this is all mostly a hypothesized concern. As of yet, bond
fund sell pressure hasn't been high enough to entail big liquidity
premiums. But some people speculate this may be a problem someday down
the road.

## Sources

* Wikipedia
* Investopedia
